Reading arcticle 1: https://www.outflank.nl/blog/2024/06/03/edr-internals-macos-linux/
https://chatgpt.com/share/6a4e8291-b0e0-83ee-b614-ad90c1530abd

EDR ---

An EDR is a security camera system for computers. It watches what happens on a machine, records suspicious behavior, and sends that information to security teams.

EDR = Endpoint Detection and Response

“Endpoint” means a device such as a laptop, desktop, server, or workstation.

So an EDR agent installed on a machine tries to answer questions like:

> Who logged in?
> What process started?
> What file was opened or changed?
> What network connection was made?
> Did malware try to run?
> Did someone try to steal credentials or source code?



What does an EDR agent actually do? 
-----------------------------------

Endpoint detection and response agents comprise multiple sensors. 

A sensor is one component of the EDR that collects a specific type of information. 

Imagine an EDR agent as a security guard with many tools

> Camera for process activity
> Door sensor for file access
> Network monitor for connections
> Login monitor for authentication
> Alarm system for suspicious behavior


Each sensor watches one or more telemetry sources. 




What is telemtry? 
-----------------

Telemetry means raw activity data collected from the system

Example: 

> A user logs in
> A process starts
> A file is created
> A file is deleted
> A program opens a network connection
> A command runs in the terminal
> A binary executes from `/tmp`
> A script modifies sensitive files


All these are events. The EDR collects these events, formats them, and send them to a central place, usually a log server or security platform. 

That central platform may be: 

SIEM
EDR cloud console
Log aggregator
Security data lake
Threat hunting platform

Then machines and humans analyze the data



What kind of events do most EDRs collect?
------------------------------------------

The blog lists common EDR capabilities:

Authentication attempts

This means login-related events.

Examples:

> A user logs into the machine.
> Someone uses SSH.
> Someone tries sudo.
> A failed password attempt happens.
> A new session starts.

These events matter because attackers often try to move through systems using stolen credentials.

Following evnts do most  EDRs collect

1. Process creation and termination
2. File access modification, creation, and deletion
3. Network traffic: Network telemetry is critical because malware often communicates with command-and-control servers



NOTE: in this articleauthor says that this is not a complete list of every possible EDR telemetry source. Instead, theyh reverse engineered popular macOS and Linux EDR productions. 



Modern macOS logging: Unified Logging
-------------------------------------

macOS has a system called Unified Logging which is Apple's central logging system. 

macOS has useful logs, but Apple locks down access to many of them. So EDR vendors cannot simply use them as their main source of telemetry.




Main modern macOS solution: Endpoint Security API
-------------------------------------------------

The most important concept in this section is the Endpoint Security API, often called ES API.

Apple recommends this API for security tools.

The ES API lets security products receive events about important system activity.




What is an ES client?
---------------------

An EDR agent can create a program that talks to the ES API. That program is called an ES client. 

It subscribes to event types.For example, it can say:

Tell me whenever a process starts.
Tell me whenever a file is created.

macOS then send those events to the client. EDR can inspect the event and forward it to its cloud or local logging system. 


NOTE: ES event types follow the format: 

`ES_EVENT_TYPE_<RESPONSE TYPE>_<EVENT TYPE NAME>`

There are two major response types: 

1. NOTIFY: The EDR gets told about the event, but it does not decidd whether the action is allowed
2. AUTH: This event means, the action is about to happen. The EDR can approve or deny the action. eg: Program wants to run → macOS asks EDR → EDR says allow or block


NOTE: Ntwork evnets are notably absent from the ES API. EDR agents can use the NetworkExtension Framework

NetworkExtensionis an Apple framework that lets approved apps observer or control  parts of the network behavior and security tools can use it to monitor network connections, filter traffic, or implement VPN-like/network-filtering features




Big architectural point: macOS EDR can work from user mode
----------------------------------------------------------

Events can be collected entirely from user-mode using the ES API and NetworkExtension framework




How macOS differs from Linux
----------------------------

On Linux, many modern security tols use kernel-level technologies such as: 

1. eBPF
2. LSM hooks
3. auditd
4. fanotify
5. kernel tracing

NOTE: Linux EDRs commonly use kernel tracing, especially eBPF, to observer process, file, and network activity from inside the kernetl


Why Correlation matters
-----------------------

Correlation means linking evnets from different sensors together. 

Example: 

ES API sees: 

> Process /usr/bin/curl tarted by user alice

Network Extension sees: 

> A network connection was made to example.com

If both events include process identity infromation, the EDR can corelated them: 

> User alice ran curl, and curl connected to example.com


Summary
-------

A macOS EDR needs Apple-approved permissions called entitlements. If it uses the Endpoint Security API, it must have the com.apple.developer.endpoint-security.client entitlement. The EDR then calls es_new_client to create an ES client and es_subscribe to choose which ES events it wants to monitor. Researchers can hook es_subscribe with tools like Frida in a lab environment to see which events the EDR subscribes to. To understand what data those events provide, tools like ESDump can print ES events as JSON. Since ES API does not monitor network traffic, EDRs use NetworkExtension features such as DNS Proxy, Content Filter, and Packet Tunnel. Audit tokens and signing identifiers help connect network activity back to the responsible process and user.


NOTE: ESDump is an open-source tol. It can subscribe to ES event types and print the received events as JSON






Why discovering Network Extension is easier than ES events
----------------------------------------------------------

Discovering the network extension provider(s) an agent implements is simple, as they each require separate entitlements.

This means each type of network extension requires Apple permission.

So if a security researcher inspects the application’s entitlements or Info.plist, they can often see what kind of network provider the app uses.

For example, it may reveal:

DNS proxy provider
content filter provider: inspect and potentially allow or deny network connections. 
packet tunnel provider




NOTE: For defenders, DNS monitoring is valuable because malware often contacts suspicious domains. 


NOTE: for NetworkExtension system extensions, signing is still required, even with SIP disabled. 


NOTE: As a system extension is utilized, the application must be copied to `/Applications/` to function. 






Telemetry Sources on Linux
--------------------------

while macOS uses Apple-controlled frameworks like: ES API and NetworkExtension. Linux EDRs use a different model. They often rely on kernel tracing

Auditd is the Linux audit daemon. It can collect security-relevant events such as: process execution, file access, permision changes, login events, syscalls. 


NOTE: only one program can subscribed to Auditd at a time. 

Suppose a company already uses Auditd for compliance logging. Then an EDR agent also tries to use Auditd. If only one program can subscribe properly, they may conflict. That creates operational problems. So EDR vendors prefer alternatives that do not conflict at much





Linux EDRs and kernel function tracing
--------------------------------------

Linux EDR agents monitor activity by attaching to important functions inside the Linux kernel. 




Kernel tracing methods 
----------------------

There are several Linux tracing mechanisms: 

1. Kprobes and return probes: 

    let's us attach to almost any kernel function or address. A kprobe triggers when the function is entered. A return probe, triggers when the function returns. 

    So this lets EDR see the input arguments, execution context, return value, process/user context

    But there are challenges. The blog says function resolution requires kernel symbols. That means the EDR must know where the target function exists in memory. 

    This can vary by: kernel version, linux distributions, kernel optimizations, etc. A function might even be optimized away. So kprbes are powerful but sometimes fragile. 




2. Tracepoints

    predefined hook location added by Linux Kernel developers. Instead of attaching to any random function, we may attach to a stable tracing point. 

    Limitation: not every function has a tracpoint. 


3. Raw tracepoints

    more performant alternative to regular tracepoints. They problem lower-level access with les overhead. 



4. Function entry/exit probes: fentry and fexit

    similar to tracepoints. They are added by GCC with `-pg` compiler option. Fentry runs when a function is entered and Fexit runs wehn a function exits. 

    


Kernel-Mode Programming: Loadable kernel Modules(Traditional way)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Historically, kernel tracing features were used by:

LKM = Loadable Kernel Module

An LKM is code loaded into the Linux kernel.

This is similar to a Windows driver.

Very powerful, but risky.

If an LKM crashes, it can crash the entire machine.

That is bad for EDR vendors because customers do not want their security product causing server outages.




What is eBPF? 
------------

The blog says Linux kernel 4.x introduced an extended version of Berkeley Packet Filter:

eBPF

eBPF allows small programs to run inside the Linux kernel safely.

The key word is:

verifiable

Before an eBPF program is loaded, the kernel verifier checks it.

The verifier tries to ensure the program will not:

crash the kernel
loop forever
access invalid memory
do unsafe operations

So eBPF gives EDR vendors kernel-level visibility with less risk than traditional kernel modules.




Why eBPF is important for EDR
------------------------------

eBPF is extremely useful for security monitoring because it can observe:

syscalls
process creation
file activity
network activity
container events
kernel tracepoints
security hooks

An EDR can load eBPF programs that run when certain kernel events happen.

Then those programs send event data to a user-mode agent.

Conceptually:

Kernel event happens
↓
eBPF program observes it
↓
event data written to eBPF map or ring buffer
↓
user-mode EDR reads it
↓
EDR sends telemetry to cloud/log server

NOTE: eBPF are limited for safety. The EDR must design small kernel programs and do more complex processing in user mode




Analyzing eBPF Programs
-----------------------

Now the blog explains how researchers inspect eBPF-based EDR sensors.

The two important eBPF components are:

programs
maps



What is an eBPF program?
-------------------------

An eBPF program is a small piece of code loaded into the kernel.

It is attached to some event source.

For example:

process creation tracepoint
file open tracepoint
network packet hook
syscall entry
syscall exit

Each program usually monitors one specific thing.

Example:

One program monitors process creation.
Another monitors file opens.
Another monitors network connections.



What is an eBPF map?
--------------------

An eBPF map is a shared data structure used by eBPF programs and user-mode programs.

Think of it like a mailbox or shared memory area.

The eBPF program writes event data into the map.

The user-mode EDR reads from the map.

Example:

Kernel eBPF program: “Process 1234 executed /bin/bash”
↓
eBPF map stores event
↓
EDR user-mode process reads event
↓
EDR forwards it to server

Maps can also store configuration.

For example:

blocklist
allowlist
policy rules
temporary event storage
process metadata cache

G




Why eBPF is important for EDR
----------------------------

eBPF is extremely useful for security monitoring because it can observer: 

1. syscalls
2. process creation
3. file activity
4. network activity
5. container events
6. kernel tracepoints
7. security hooks

An EDR can load eBPF programs that run when certain kernel events happen.

Then those programs send event data to a user-mode agent.

Conceptually:

Kernel event happens
↓
eBPF program observes it
↓
event data written to eBPF map or ring buffer
↓
user-mode EDR reads it
↓
EDR sends telemetry to cloud/log server





eBPF constraints
-----------------

eBPF programs have material constraints like: loops, memory access, program size, helper functions, kernel compatability, complex processing. 

These rerstrictions reduce crash risk but make development harder. 

The EDR must design small kernel programs and do more complex processing in user mode. 

NOTE: eBPF programs are not loaded as normal native machine code at first. They are compiled into eBPF bytecode and then Linux JIT-compiles eBPF bytecode into native CPU instructions. 



What is bpftool?
----------------

bpftool is a Linux command-line tool used to inspect eBPF objects.

You can use it to list:

loaded eBPF programs
eBPF maps
program bytecode
map contents
attached hooks

For eBPF analysis, bpftool is like a microscope.




Listing loaded eBPF programs
----------------------------

The blog shows:

bpftool prog list
This command lists currently loaded eBPF programs.

Example output:

52: raw_tracepoint  name ProcCreateRawExit  tag ebba2584bc0537a4  gpl
        loaded_at 2024-05-14T12:42:20-0500  uid 0
        xlated 6912B  jited 3850B  memlock 8192B  map_ids 3,5,11,9,8,10
        btf_id 54
        pids sysmon(807)



In the above output: 

1. Program ID: eBPF program ID

2. Program Type: raw_tracepoint tells us the program is attached to a raw tracpoint. 

3. ProcCreateRawExit: This name suggests it is related to process creation and syscall exit behavior

4. tag: ebba258... is like a hashed identifier for the program

5. uid 0 means the root loaded it. 

6. xlated 6912B means translated eBPF instruction size and jited 3850B means just in time compiled machine code size. 

7. memlock 8192B is the amount of locked kernel memory used. 

8. Map IDs. This tells which eBPF maps the program uses. That helps researchers connect programs to their data storage.  

9. pids sysmon(807): This tells the associated user-mode process. This is very useful because the system may have many unrelated eBPF programs loaded The PID helps identify which ones belong to Sysmon. 






Dumping eBPF bytecode
--------------------

`bpftool prog dump`

This dumps the actual instructions of the eBPF program(not the byte code)

Example output:

int ProcCreateRawExit(struct bpf_our_raw_tracepoint_args * ctx):
0xffffffffc02f18e8:
; int ProcCreateRawExit(struct bpf_our_raw_tracepoint_args *ctx)
   0:	nopl   0x0(%rax,%rax,1)
   5:	xchg   %ax,%ax
   7:	push   %rbp
   8:	mov    %rsp,%rbp

Researchers can inspect what the eBPF program is doing. 




Listing eBPF maps
-----------------

The blog shows:

bpftool map list
Example:

11: array  name eventStorageMap  flags 0x0
        key 4B  value 65512B  max_entries 512  memlock 33546240B
        pids sysmon(807)



Explanation: 

11 is the map identifier. This map is an array-like structure. The name suggests it stores event data.

The key is 4 bytes and each value can be aroudnu 65KB. This map can hold 512 entries.


We can also do: 

1.Dumping map contents
2.   









------------------------------------------------





What is Correlation Engine
--------------------------


Correlation Engine: part of our EDR that connnects multiple-low-level events and convert them into meanintful security findings. 

eBPF gives us raw telemetry such as:

`
    Process executed
    File opened
    Network connection made
    Privilege changed
`

But a single event usually does not prove an attack.

For example:

    > bash executed

This alone may be normal.

    > bash opened /etc/passwd

This may still be normal.

but

    > bash was spawned by nginx, opened /etc/passwd, and then connected to an external IP

now it becomes highly sus


NOTE: Correlation engine converts Linux monitoring tool to Linux EDR prototye





Input and Output of Correlation Engine
--------------------------------------

The correlation engine receives normalized events like: 

`
    Event Type: process_exec
    Time: 10:30:01
    PID: 2451
    Process: bash
    Executable: /usr/bin/bash
    Parent PID: 900
    Parent Process: nginx
    User ID: 33
`



`
    Event Type: file_open
    Time: 10:30:05
    PID: 2451
    Process: bash
    File Path: /etc/passwd
    Access Mode: read
`


`
    Event Type: network_connect
    Time: 10:30:07
    PID: 2480
    Process: curl
    Parent Process: bash
    Destination IP: 45.33.32.156
    Destination Port: 80
`


Then the correlation engine outputs: 

`
    Alert Name: Possible Web Shell Activity
    Severity: Critical
    Risk Score: 95

    Evidence:
    1. nginx spawned bash
    2. bash opened /etc/passwd
    3. child process curl connected to external IP
`





Correlation engine is stateful
------------------------------

It does not only look at the current event. It remebers recent activity

It maintsis these internal records


1. PROCESS TABLE

stores info about processes that are currently activie or recently active

we should not identify a process only by PID because Linux can reuse PIDs. So we use a more stable identity: 

process_key = PID + process_start_time


2. PROCESS TREE 

shows the parent-child relationships

nginx
 └── bash
      └── curl

This is very important because attacks often happen across multiple related processes



3. RECENT EVENT WINDOW

The engine keeps recent events for a limited time

Example: 

    Keep events from the last 60 seconds.
    Keep suspicious cases for 5 minutes.
    Keep exited process information for 1–5 minutes.


Because correlation depends on time. If process executes from /tmp AND makes network connection within 10 seconds -> THEN suspicious. But if the network connection happens after 5 hours, it may not be related





4. ACTIVE SUSPICIOUS CASES

Sometimes one eventt starts a suspicious case, but more eveidence comes later. 

Example: 

    nginx spawned bash


This is suspicious, so the engine creates an active case: 

    Case ID: case-001
    Main Process: bash
    Reason: Shell spawned by web server
    Risk Score: 70
    Status: Open


Then later: 
    
    bash opens /etc/passwd

The engine updates the same case: 

    Case ID: case-001
    New Evidence: bash opened /etc/passwd
    Risk Score: 90
    Status: Alert Generated


5. Per-Process Event History
6. Risk Score Table
7. Allowlist / False Positive Rules







High level pseudocode
---------------------

START Correlation Engine

WHILE EDR is running:

    RECEIVE next event from userspace event pipeline

    NORMALIZE event into common format

    ENRICH event with:
        process name
        executable path
        parent process
        user ID
        process key
        container ID if available

    UPDATE internal state:
        update process table
        update process tree
        store event in recent event window
        store event in per-process history

    CHECK correlation rules:
        check same-process rules
        check parent-child rules
        check descendant-process rules
        check sensitive-file rules
        check network rules
        check privilege-change rules
        check aggregation rules

    FOR each matched rule:
        collect evidence
        update risk score
        update or create active case

    IF risk score crosses alert threshold:
        generate alert
        attach evidence chain
        attach process tree
        assign severity
        save alert

    REMOVE old events and expired cases

END WHILE





Event Handling pseudocode
-------------------------
FUNCTION handle_event(event):

    Step 1: Identify the process
        Find process_key using PID and process start time

    Step 2: Attach parent information
        Find parent process using PPID and parent start time

    Step 3: Update process state
        If event is process execution:
            add new process to process table
            connect it to its parent in process tree

        If event is process exit:
            mark process as exited
            keep its record temporarily

        If event is file/network/privilege event:
            attach event to the correct process history

    Step 4: Store event
        Add event to recent global window
        Add event to that process's event history

    Step 5: Run correlation logic
        Compare current event with previous related events

    Step 6: Generate alert if required

END FUNCTION








Same-process correlation
-------------------------

RULE: Temporary executable followed by network connection

WHEN a network connection event is received:

    FIND the process that made the connection

    LOOK at recent events of the same process

    IF same process executed from /tmp
       AND network connection happened within 10 seconds:

        CREATE rule match:
            Rule Name: Temporary executable made outbound connection
            Severity: High
            Evidence:
                execution event
                network event

        INCREASE risk score






Parent-child correlation
------------------------

RULE: Web server spawned shell

WHEN a process execution event is received:

    GET current process name
    GET parent process name

    IF parent process is one of:
        nginx, apache2, httpd, php-fpm

    AND current process is one of:
        sh, bash, dash, zsh

    THEN:
        CREATE suspicious case
        ADD evidence:
            parent process
            child shell process

        SET risk score to high




Descendant-process correlation
------------------------------

This is more advanced than parent-child correlation.

Sometimes the suspicious action is not done by the direct child. It is done by a grandchild or later descendant.

nginx
 └── bash
      └── curl


RULE: Suspicious process tree made external connection

WHEN a network connection event is received:

    FIND the process that made the connection

    CHECK whether this process belongs to an existing suspicious process tree

    IF the process is:
        the original suspicious process
        OR child of suspicious process
        OR descendant of suspicious process

    THEN:
        ADD network event to the existing case
        INCREASE risk score
        IF score is critical:
            GENERATE alert





Sensitive file access correlation
----------------------------------

This type checks whether a suspicous process accessed sensitive files


RULE: Suspicious process accessed sensitive file

WHEN a file open event is received:

    CHECK file path

    IF file path is sensitive:

        FIND the process that opened the file

        CHECK whether process is already suspicious

        IF process is already part of suspicious case:
            ADD file event as evidence
            INCREASE risk score significantly

        ELSE IF process is not normally allowed to read this file:
            CREATE new suspicious case
            SET medium or high risk score




Privilege-change correlation
----------------------------

This type checks whether a process suddenly gained more privileges.

UID changed from 1000 to 0
SUID bit added to a file
A suspicious process executed a SUID binary
Kernel module loaded unexpectedly

Pseudocode

RULE: Suspicious privilege escalation

WHEN a privilege-related event is received:

    FIND process identity

    CHECK old privilege level
    CHECK new privilege level

    IF user changed from normal user to root:
        CHECK whether process is trusted

        IF process is not trusted:
            CREATE critical rule match
            ADD privilege-change event as evidence
            INCREASE risk score

    IF file permission changed to include SUID bit:
        CHECK which process changed it

        IF process is suspicious:
            CREATE critical alert





Aggregation-based correlation
-----------------------------


Some attacks are not detected by one specific sequence. They are detected by volume or repetition

Example: 

    Same process reads many sensitive files in 30 seconds.
    Same process creates many outbound connections.
    Same user launches many shells quickly.
    Same process repeatedly fails to access protected files.



Pseudocode: 

RULE: Many sensitive files accessed quickly

WHEN a file event is received:

    FIND all file events from same process in last 30 seconds

    COUNT how many sensitive files were accessed

    IF count is greater than threshold:
        CREATE alert:
            possible credential discovery
        ADD all related file events as evidence
        INCREASE risk score




Risk scoring pseudocode
----------------------

Instead of generating alerts immediately for every sus event, assign scores

    Executable from /tmp: +25
    Web server spawned shell: +60
    External network connection: +25
    Sensitive file access: +35
    Privilege changed to root: +50
    Known safe process: -30
    Trusted destination IP: -15



Pseudocode: 

FUNCTION update_risk_score(case, rule_match):

    ADD rule score to case score

    IF event is from allowlisted process:
        SUBTRACT allowlist score

    IF destination is trusted:
        SUBTRACT network trust score

    IF process is already suspicious:
        ADD chaining bonus

    IF multiple suspicious events happened close together:
        ADD time-window bonus

    LIMIT final score between 0 and 100

    RETURN final score




False Positive Handling
-----------------------

Not every sus looking behavior is malicious

    A backup script may read many files.
    A package manager may execute scripts.
    A system administrator may use curl.
    A cron job may spawn shell scripts.

So before alerting, the engine should check allowlists




State cleanup psuedocode
------------------------

The engine must remove old data to avoid memory growth

EVERY few seconds:

    REMOVE events older than event window

    REMOVE inactive cases older than case timeout

    REMOVE exited process records after retention time

    REMOVE old risk scores for inactive processes

    KEEP alerts permanently in alert store


